Documentation for default Elasticsearch VDB (#472)
NVIDIA-AI-Blueprints/rag: docs/change-vectordb.md

  SPDX-FileCopyrightText: Copyright (c) 2025 NVIDIA CORPORATION & AFFILIATES. All rights reserved.
  SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0
-->
# Vector Database Configuration for NVIDIA RAG Blueprint

> The [NVIDIA RAG Blueprint](readme.md) supports multiple vector database backends, including [Elasticsearch](https://www.elastic.co/elasticsearch/vector-database) and [Milvus](https://milvus.io/docs). **Elasticsearch is the default vector database.** Standard deployments use Elasticsearch out of the box—no separate “switch” is required. The RAG and Ingestor servers default to `APP_VECTORSTORE_NAME=elasticsearch` and `APP_VECTORSTORE_URL=http://elasticsearch:9200` in Docker Compose, or to the bundled ECK Elasticsearch HTTP service in Helm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[NVIDIA RAG Blueprint](readme.md) is compatible with several vector database backends, including [Elasticsearch](https://www.elastic.co/elasticsearch/vector-database) and [Milvus](https://milvus.io/docs). Elasticsearch is the default option. Standard deployments automatically use Elasticsearch—no manual configuration is required. In both the RAG and Ingestor servers, the defaults are set to `APP_VECTORSTORE_NAME=elasticsearch` and `APP_VECTORSTORE_URL=http://elasticsearch:9200` in Docker Compose, or to the bundled ECK Elasticsearch HTTP service when using Helm.
```

Milvus is available as an optional secondary backend when you want that stack instead.

> After you have [deployed the blueprint](readme.md#deployment-options-for-rag-blueprint), use this page to configure Elasticsearch (authentication, index settings), use the default Elasticsearch path, switch to Milvus, or integrate a custom vector database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Milvus is available as an optional secondary backend if you prefer to use that stack.

After you’ve [deployed the blueprint](readme.md#deployment-options-for-rag-blueprint), use this page to configure Elasticsearch settings (including authentication and index options), work with the default Elasticsearch setup, switch to Milvus, or connect a custom vector database.
```

:::{tip}
To navigate this page more easily, click the outline button at the top of the page. ![outline-button](assets/outline-button.png)
:::

## Configuring Elasticsearch

Use this section as a map to the topics below.

> - **Elasticsearch client (library installs)** – For local development without the pre-built Docker images, install Elasticsearch support with `pip install nvidia_rag[elasticsearch]` or `uv sync --extra elasticsearch`. The Docker images include this dependency by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Elasticsearch client (library installs)** – For local development without the pre-built Docker images, enable Elasticsearch support by installing nvidia_rag[elasticsearch] using `pip install nvidia_rag[elasticsearch]` or `uv sync --extra elasticsearch`. The Docker images already include this dependency.
```

- **Changing the backend** – If you switch between vector databases (for example Elasticsearch and Milvus), you must re-upload your documents; data is not migrated automatically.

> - **Port** – Elasticsearch listens on port **9200** by default. Ensure it is available or adjust your configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Port** – Elasticsearch listens on port 9200 by default. Ensure it is available or adjust your configuration.
```

- **Folder permissions (Docker Compose)** – Elasticsearch data is stored under `volumes/elasticsearch`. Create the directory and set ownership if required:

    ```bash
    sudo mkdir -p deploy/compose/volumes/elasticsearch/
    sudo chown -R 1000:1000 deploy/compose/volumes/elasticsearch/
    ```

   :::{note}
   If the Elasticsearch container fails to start due to permission issues, you may optionally use `sudo chmod -R 777 deploy/compose/volumes/elasticsearch/` for broader access.
   :::

> - **Authentication** – See [Elasticsearch Authentication](#elasticsearch-authentication) for xpack, API keys, and Helm (ECK) credentials.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Authentication** – Refer to [Elasticsearch Authentication](#elasticsearch-authentication) for xpack, API keys, and Helm (ECK) credentials.
```

        APP_VECTORSTORE_PASSWORD: ""
   ```

> 2. Ensure Elasticsearch (ECK) is enabled in [`values.yaml`](../deploy/helm/nvidia-blueprint-rag/values.yaml). This is the default; the following block is the reference configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ensure that Elasticsearch (ECK) is enabled in [values.yaml](../deploy/helm/nvidia-blueprint-rag/values.yaml). This is the default setting; use the following block as the reference configuration:
```

You should see a response that indicates the cluster status is green or yellow, confirming that Elasticsearch is operational and ready to store embeddings.

## Switching to Milvus

> Use Milvus when you want the optional Milvus stack instead of Elasticsearch. **You must re-upload your documents** after switching; embeddings stored in Elasticsearch are not migrated to Milvus automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use Milvus when you want the optional Milvus stack instead of Elasticsearch. You must re-upload your documents after switching; embeddings stored in Elasticsearch are not migrated to Milvus automatically.
```

### Disable Default Vector Database and Add Custom Helm Chart

> 1. **Disable the chart-managed vector databases you are replacing** in [`values.yaml`](../deploy/helm/nvidia-blueprint-rag/values.yaml). The defaults deploy Elasticsearch (ECK) and keep Milvus optional via nv-ingest; for a custom Helm chart backend, turn off the bundled backends you no longer need—for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Disable the chart-managed vector databases you are replacing** in [values.yaml](../deploy/helm/nvidia-blueprint-rag/values.yaml). The default configuration deploys Elasticsearch (ECK) and keeps Milvus optional through nv-ingest; for a custom Helm chart backend, disable any bundled backends you no longer need—for example:
```
